---
title: "Software Philosophies - Part 1: Domain Driven Design"
date: 2025-01-01
draft: true
description: "Part one of the series Software Philosophies"
summary: "A (long) blog on the principles and foundations of Domain-Driven Design"
toc: true
readTime: true
autonumber: true
tags: ['ddd', 'software-design', 'software-philosophies']
math: true
showTags: true
---

# Introduction
In 2019, we were asked to re-design Statsbomb's data collection platform to support realtime events. This was a big task that got everyone across the tech team (in 2 countries) to have deep discussions about every single UI component, service, database and tool. We had to design the system from the ground up.
Our goal was clear, but we had no idea how to achieve it, there were a lot of options and tons of tooling that could "theoretically" get us there. Therefore, lots of different opinions.
My first idea was to stream changing events from our core DB into a new Kafka cluster and have them delivered to our processing services. Well, looking at this now, it's not such a terrible idea, and if I remember correctly, after all the heated discussions we got this implemented somehow.

## The Journey Begins
What I strongly remember are the long and deep discussions I had with my friend Saad about how we should think about the problem itself.
This was my first real interaction with topics like FP, Domain Driven Design, EDA, Streaming Systems and most of the main areas that I have worked on ever since.

## About This Series
In this series of blogs, I'll try to go over one topic at a time and write a comprehensive guide about it and share some resources that I find invaluable.
I'll cover topics such as:

- Domain Driven Design
- Event Driven Architecture
- Functional Programming
- Reactive Programming

## Why Start With DDD?
Specifically, in this blog, I've decided to start with Domain Driven Design. If you look at any SWE bookshelf, you will probably notice a large blue book. This is the DDD book by Eric Evans.

## What's DDD
Domain Driven Design (and the book by Eric Evans) covers in detail the set of principles and rules that allows you to build your system based on a solid model of domain understanding. This is especially important when you are building software for a complex domain that often requires deep experience to understand and is usually messy.

### The Problem

When building software, the toughest part is usually getting communication right. You have the business side, product side and engineering side. And depending on your organization size the communication channel between these sides can get really messy.

But the one thing that's common in most cases regardless of the organization size is that each side of these has a different understanding and view of the problem and the solution.

Oftenly, there are wide range of reasons why would software projects fail. I tried to caputre it in this visualization:

<IMAGE_HERE>

*Domain Driven Design* tries to solve some of the problems in this Venndiagram. It sets a set of rules that helps the engineers build on a modeled understanding of the domain provided by the business and product sides.


### DDD Approach

Looking at the venn diagram, you can see that a lot of problems comes from misalignment and communication gaps. DDD tries to tackle this by establishing a common ground between all sides. Instead of having engineers build what they think is right, product people designing what they think users want, and business folks trying to explain complex domain knowledge - DDD introduces a systematic approach to get everyone on the same page.

#### Domain

This word gets thrown around a lot in tech (like many other words), but what does it actually mean? Think about it this way - if you're building a system like Airbnb, your domain isn't just about APIs or databases. It's about understanding how hospitality works, what makes a great guest experience, how hosts manage their properties, and what makes people trust staying in a stranger's home.
Your domain is basically your problem space - it's what your business actually does, not the technical implementation of it. This is why engineers who deeply understand their business domain are usually more valuable than those who just write code (even good code).


#### Ubiquitous Language

This is probably my favorite part of DDD, and I wish I knew about it earlier in my career. The idea is simple - everyone involved in the project should speak the same language. 
 
No more meetings where business calls it "user engagement" while engineers call it "activity_metric" and product calls it "interaction index".
When teams use different terms for the same concept, it creates confusion and wastes time in translations. I've seen this happen countless times specially in data projects where data scientists, engineers, and business analysts all use different terms for the same metrics.

Implementing this require a larger effort than just aligning on names. This means that your system should be designed using the common language. Each service, repo, function, etc. Should have a business meaning.

A [Must Read](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TwoHardThings.html) if you haven't already.


#### Model-Driven Design

This is where things get interesting. Once you have your domain understanding and common language, you start modeling your software around it. But unlike traditional approaches where we often model around technical constraints, in DDD you model around domain concepts.
For instance, when building a real-time analytics system, instead of thinking about database tables and message queues first, you focus on modeling what an "event" actually means in your domain. How does it change? What rules govern it? This helps make better technical decisions later because your foundation is solid.

<IMAGE_HERE>

## Design Principles

After understanding the core ideas behind DDD, we can dive into how to actually implement these ideas.

DDD has two main design approaches: 

- *Strategic*: This is the big picture stuff - how different parts of your system work together.
- *Tactical*: This is the nitty-gritty details of implementing each part.

### Strategic Design

Strategic design is about understanding the big picture of your system. It's about defining the boundaries of your system and how different parts of your system work together.

This is the solution space and how you can design your services to work together. This is not a technical debate of which tools you should use, but rather it's a modeling approach of how you can design your system to actually reflect to the domain.

Here's the key concepts

#### Bounded Contexts

I like to think of bounded contexts as the building blocks of the system. Take Uber for example - you have the ride-hailing context, the payment context, and the driver management context. Each of these contexts has its own rules, its own data model, and even its own language.
The beauty of bounded contexts is that they help you handle complexity. Instead of building one massive system where everything is connected to everything else (we've all been there), you build smaller, focused systems that communicate through well-defined interfaces.

And don't get me wrong, this doesn't mean you can only implement this in a microservices architecture. The idea is about designing the solution space, it's a higher level than the actual system design. You can take this solution space and impleement it in any software setup. Monolithic, Microservices, Event-Driven, etc. Even a local desktop application can follow this approach.

#### Context Mapping

Now we've split the system into bounded contexts, you need to figure out how they talk to each other. Context mapping is basically documenting these relationships. This is where you define the boundaries of your system and how different parts of your system work together. In general, we are trying to define the business relationships between the bounded contexts.
You might have contexts that share data, contexts that translate between different models, or contexts that need to stay in sync. Understanding these relationships helps you build better integration points and avoid the "everything is connected to everything" mess. 

#### Subdomains

Subdomains as the natural divisions in your business domain. It's what deffrentiates your business from the competition.  You usually have:

- Core subdomains (the stuff that makes your business unique)
- Supporting subdomains (important but not unique)
- Generic subdomains (stuff everyone needs)

For instance, Netflix's core subdomain would be their content streaming and recommendation system. This what gives them edge over their competitors. Their billing system? That's probably a supporting subdomain - important but not what makes them special.


### Tactical Design

After designing the strategic design (High Level), we can dive into the tactical design (Implementation Details). This is where we actually start building the system.

#### Entities & Value Objects
Entities and Value Objects are similar to classes in OOP, functions in FP, Pods in Kubernetes, etc. You get the idea.

These are the foundational building blocks in DDD. The key distinction lies in how we treat their identity and lifecycle.
Entities maintain their identity throughout their lifecycle. No matter what changes happen to their attributes, they're still the same entity. This is not just a technical concept - it's deeply rooted in how we naturally think about things in our domain. When domain experts talk about something that maintains its identity despite changes, that's probably an entity.

Value Objects are a bit more interesting. They have no identity of their own - they're defined entirely by their attributes. When you modify a Value Object's attributes, you're effectively creating a new Value Object. This immutability isn't just a technical choice - it reflects how these concepts work in the real world. Value Objects are perfect for representing domain concepts where the values themselves matter more than any sense of identity.

The real power of Value Objects shows up when you start using them to encapsulate domain rules. Instead of having business logic scattered throughout your codebase, you can bundle it right where it belongs. This makes your code not just cleaner, but also more aligned with the business and product side.

#### Aggregates

When you study DDD, aggregates are one of the most confusing concepts. But when you think about it from the business side. Aggregates are just any group of entities that are tightly coupled. Martin Fowler puts it this way:

> Aggregate is a pattern in Domain-Driven Design. A DDD aggregate is a cluster of domain objects that can be treated as a single unit. An example may be an order and its line-items, these will be separate objects, but it's useful to treat the order (together with its line items) as a single aggregate.
> An aggregate will have one of its component objects be the aggregate root. Any references from outside the aggregate should only go to the aggregate root. The root can thus ensure the integrity of the aggregate as a whole.
> Aggregates are the basic element of transfer of data storage - you request to load or save whole aggregates. Transactions should not cross aggregate boundaries.
> DDD Aggregates are sometimes confused with collection classes (lists, maps, etc). DDD aggregates are domain concepts (order, clinic visit, playlist), while collections are generic. An aggregate will often contain mutliple collections, together with simple fields. The term “aggregate” is a common one, and is used in various different contexts (e.g. UML), in which case it does not refer to the same concept as a DDD aggregate.

Source: [Martin Fowler](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/DDD_Aggregate.html)


##### Designing aggregates

The thing that took me years to really get is that aggregates should be way smaller than what we initially think. We often try to model too much in a single aggregate because it feels safer, like we're ensuring consistency across everything. But that's a trap - it leads to these massive objects that are hard to work with and even harder to keep consistent (Eventually a massive tech debt). Cause every aggregate is a consistency boundary, a transactional boundary, and a lock boundary. 

In fact, aggregates are all about transactional consistency. If two things need to be consistent with each other all the time, they probably belong in the same aggregate. If eventual consistency is acceptable, they probably don't. This simple rule has saved me from creating monster aggregates many times. 
One of the things that you have to push when talkig with the business side about entites is that if transactional/strong consistencey is really required. They usually think that, but when you understand the problem and the domain, most of the time, eventual consistency is enough.

Since aggregates are a set of entities together, It's important to think about an aggregates design as a tree of entities. (Similar to how a set is implemented, right?).

<IMAGE_HERE>


#### Events


#### Repositories & Factories

#### Services


## Anti-Patterns

## Shortcomings

## Resources

## Conclusion

